
### Interpretation
The interpretation of the logistic regression weights differs from the linear regression case, because in logistic regression the outcome is a probability between 0 and 1, and the weights don't affect the probability linearly, but are squeezed through the logistic function.
That's why we need to reformulate the equation for the interpretation, so that there is only the linear term left on the right side of the formula.

{$$}log\left(\frac{P(y_{i}=1)}{1-P(y_{i}=1)}\right)=log\left(\frac{P(y_{i}=1)}{P(y_{i}=0)}\right)=\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}x_{i,1}+\ldots+\beta_{p}x_{i,p}{/$$}

{$$}\frac{P(y_{i}=1)}{1-P(y_{i}=1)}{/$$} is also called odds (probability of event divided by probability of no event) and {$$}log\left(\frac{P(y_{i}=1)}{1-P(y_{i}=1)}\right){/$$} is called log odds.
So with a logistic regression model we have a linear model for the log odds.
Great!
Doesn't sound helpful!
Well, with a bit of shuffling again, you can find out how the prediction changes, when one of the features {$$}x_j{/$$} is changed by 1 point.
For this we can first apply the {$$}exp(){/$$} function on both sides of the equation:

{$$}\frac{P(y_{i}=1)}{(1-P(y_{i}=1))}=odds_i=exp\left(\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}x_{i,1}+\ldots+\beta_{p}x_{i,p}\right){/$$}

Then we compare what happens when we increase one of the {$$}x_{i,j}{/$$} by 1.
But instead of looking at the difference, we look at the ratio of the two predictions:

$$\frac{odds_{i,x_j+1}}{odds_i}=\frac{exp\left(\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}x_{i,1}+\ldots+\beta_{j}(x_{i,j} + 1)+\ldots+\beta_{p}x_{i,p}\right)}{exp\left(\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}x_{i,1}+\ldots+\beta_{j}x_{i,j}+\ldots+\beta_{p}x_{i,p}\right)}$$

Using the rule that {$$}\frac{exp(a)}{exp(b)}=exp(a-b){/$$} gives us:

{$$}\begin{aligned}\frac{odds_{i,x_j+1}}{odds_i}&=&exp\left(\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}x_{i,1}\ldots\beta_{j}(x_{i,j}+1)+\ldots+\beta_{i,p}x_{i,p}\right)\\&&-exp\left(\beta_{0}+\beta_{1}x_{i,1}+\ldots+\beta_{j}x_{i,j}+\ldots+\beta_{p}x_{i,p}\right)\end{aligned}{/$$}

And then we can remove a lot of terms from the equation, which is convenient:
{$$}\frac{odds_{i,x_j+1}}{odds_i}=exp\left(\beta_{j}(x_{i,j}+1)-\beta_{j}x_{i,j}\right)=exp\left(\beta_j\right){/$$}

And we end up with something simple like {$$}\exp(\beta_j){/$$}.
So a change of {$$}x_j{/$$} by one unit changes the odds ratio (multiplicatively) by a factor of {$$}\exp(\beta_j){/$$}.
We could also interpret it this way:
A change in {$$}x_j{/$$} by one unit changes the log odds ratio by {$$}\beta_j{/$$} units, but most people do the former because thinking about the {$$}log(){/$$} of something is known to be hard on the brain.
Interpreting the odds ratio already needs a bit of getting used to.
For example if you have odds of 2, it means that the probability for {$$}y_i=1{/$$} is twice as big as {$$}y_i=0{/$$}.
If you have a {$$}\beta_j{/$$} (=odds ratio) of {$$}0.7{/$$}, then an increase in the respective {$$}x_j{/$$} by one unit multiplies the odds by {$$}\exp(0.7)\approx2{/$$} and the odds change to 4.
But usually you don't deal with the odds and only interpret the {$$}\beta{/$$}'s as the odds ratios.
Because for actually calculating the odds you would need to set a value for each feature {$$}x_j{/$$}, which only makes sense if you want to look at one specific instance of your dataset.

Here are the interpretations for the logistic regression model with different feature types:

- Numerical feature: For an increase of one unit of the feature {$$}x_{j}{/$$}, the estimated odds change (multiplicatively) by a factor of {$$}\exp(\beta_{j}){/$$}
- Binary categorical feature: One of the two values of the feature is the reference level (in some languages the one that was coded in 0).
A change of the feature {$$}x_{j}{/$$} from the reference level to the other level changes the estimated odds (multiplicatively) by a factor of {$$}\exp(\beta_{j}){/$$}
- Categorical feature with many levels: One solution to deal with many possible feature values is to one-hot-encode them, meaning each level gets its own column.
From a categorical feature with L levels, you only need L-1 columns, otherwise it is over-parameterised. The interpretation for each level is then according to the binary features.
- Intercept {$$}\beta_{0}{/$$}: Given all numerical features are zero and the categorical features are at the reference level, the estimated odds are {$$}\exp(\beta_{0}){/$$}.
The interpretation of {$$}\beta_{0}{/$$} is usually not relevant.

### Example
We use the logistic regression model to predict cervical cancer given some risk factors.
The data are described in Chapter \@ref(cervical)

|                            | Weight| Odds ratio| Std. Error|
|:---------------------------|------:|----------:|----------:|
|Intercept                   |   2.91|      18.36|       0.32|
|Hormonal contraceptives y/n |   0.12|       1.12|       0.30|
|Smokes y/n                  |  -0.26|       0.77|       0.37|
|Num. of pregnancies         |  -0.04|       0.96|       0.10|
|Num. of diagnosed STDs      |  -0.82|       0.44|       0.33|
|Intrauterine device y/n     |  -0.62|       0.54|       0.40|

Interpretation of a numerical feature ('Num. of diagnosed STDs'):
An increase of the number of diagnosed STDs (sexually transmitted diseases) changes (decreases) the odds for cancer vs. no cancer multiplicatively by 0.44, given all other features stay the same.
Keep in mind that correlation does not imply causation.
No recommendation here to get STDs.

Interpretation of a categorical feature ('Hormonal contraceptives y/n'):
For women with hormonal contraceptives, the odds for cancer vs. no cancer are by a factor of 1.12 higher, compared to women without hormonal contraceptives, given all other features stay the same.

Again as in the linear models, the interpretations are always coming with the clause that 'all other features stay the same'.
